The pathology of heuristic search in the 8-puzzle

> In practice, an incomplete heuristic search nearly always finds better solutions if it is allowed to search deeper, i.e. expand and heuristically evaluate more nodes in the search tree. On the rare occasions when searching deeper is not beneficial, a curious phenomenon called ‘search pathology’ occurs. In this article, we study the pathology and gain of a deeper search of the minimin algorithm in the 8-puzzle, a domain often used for evaluating single-agent search algorithms. We have analysed the influence of various properties of the search tree and the heuristic evaluation function on the gain and the pathology. In order to investigate a broad range of the properties, the original 8-puzzle was extended with diagonal moves, yielding a larger variety of search trees. It turned out that in the 8-puzzle, a substantial proportion of the solvable positions is pathological under various parameters. More importantly, the search parameters that enable the highest gains are quite consistent in pathological and non-pathological positions alike, thus pointing to potentially successful search strategies. 

http://www.cs.rpi.edu/academics/courses/fall00/ai/assignments/assign3heuristics.html

Title: Intelligent system design using hyper-heuristics
Author: Pillay, Nelishia
Subjects: Hyper-Heuristics ; Evolutionary Algorithms ; Algorithm Design
Is Part Of: South African Computer Journal, Jul 2015, Vol.56, pp.107-119 [Peer Reviewed Journal]
Description: Determining the most appropriate search method or artificial intelligence technique to solve a problem is not always evident and usually requires implementation of different approaches to ascertain this. In some instances a single approach may not be sufficient and hybridization of methods may be needed to find a solution. This process can be time consuming. The paper proposes the use of hyper-heuristics as a means of identifying which method or combination of approaches is needed to solve a problem. The research presented forms part of a larger initiative aimed at using hyper-heuristics to develop intelligent hybrid systems. As an initial step in this direction, this paper investigates this for classical artificial intelligence uninformed and informed search methods, namely depth first search, breadth first search, best first search, hill-climbing and the A* algorithm. The hyper-heuristic determines the search or combination of searches to use to solve the problem. An evolutionary algorithm hyper-heuristic is implemented for this purpose and its performance is evaluated in solving the 8-Puzzle, Towers of Hanoi and Blocks World problems. The hyper-heuristic employs a generational evolutionary algorithm which iteratively refines an initial population. On each iteration the evolutionary algorithm uses tournament selection to select parents. The mutation and crossover operators are applied to the chosen parents to produce offspring for the next generation. The hyper-heuristic was able to identify a search or combination of searches to produce solutions for the twenty 8-Puzzle, five Towers of Hanoi and five Blocks World problems. Furthermore, admissible solutions were produced for all problem instances. A different search or combination of searches was evolved for each problem instance. This study has highlighted the potential of hyper-heuristics for the automated design of intelligent systems. Given this success, future work will investigate the use of hyper-heuristics for the design of intelligent hybrid systems for high-level reasoning, which will combine genetic algorithms, tabu search, variable neighbourhood search and simulated annealing. The automated design of intelligent systems has long term benefits for the software industry as a means of reducing the man hours needed for system design. 

https://heuristicswiki.wikispaces.com/N+-+Puzzle

Title: Solving the 8-puzzle problem using genetic programming
Author: Igwe, Kevin ; Pillay, Nelishia ; Rae, Christopher
Subjects: 8-Puzzle Problem ; Genetic Programming ; Computer Science
Is Part Of: Proceedings of the South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists Conference, 07 October 2013, pp.64-67 
Description:
The 8-puzzle problem is a classic artificial intelligence problem which has been well-researched. The research in this domain has focused on evaluating traditional search methods such as the breadth-first search and the A* algorithm and deriving and testing various heuristics for use with informed searches to solve the 8-puzzle problem. The study presented in this paper evaluates a machine learning technique, namely genetic programming, as means of solving the 8-puzzle problem. The genetic programming algorithm uses the grow method to create an initial population which is iteratively refined using tournament selection to choose parents which the reproduction, mutation and crossover operators are applied to, thereby producing successive generations. The edit operator has been used to exert parsimony pressure in order to reduce the size of solution trees and hence the number of moves to solve a problem instance. The genetic programming system was successfully applied to 20 problem instances of differing difficulty, producing solutions to all 20 problems. Furthermore, for a majority of the problems the solutions produced solve the problem instance using the known minimum number of moves.